prep blog post for AI cost inferencing (#542)
opencost/opencost-website: blog/2026-07-01-opencost-llmd-inference-cost/index.md

---
slug: opencost-llmd-inference-cost

> title: "Clueless About the Cost of AI Model Usage? OpenCost + llm-d = First-of-a-Kind Kubernetes Inference Cost Tracking"

Author: ```suggestion
title: "OpenCost 1.121.0: First-of-a-Kind Kubernetes Inference Cost Tracking"
```

To close this gap, we are integrating [OpenCost](https://opencost.io), a CNCF incubating project, with [llm-d](https://llm-d.ai), a CNCF sandbox project for distributed LLM inference on Kubernetes. This post explains how the integration works, what metrics it produces, and how platform teams can use them to make data-driven decisions.

## GPUs are just CPUs with a bigger price tag and a worse visibility story

OpenCost's existing Kubernetes cost allocation logic already handles CPU, RAM, and general GPU costs. What was missing was the inference layer: the ability to connect infrastructure costs to the token stream flowing through vLLM and expose those costs in terms that are meaningful for AI platform decisions.

Kubernetes resource allocation has always had an efficiency problem. Teams size CPU and memory requests based on estimates, which often leads to overprovisioned workloads and silently accumulating idle capacity. With GPUs, the cost of getting this wrong is an order of magnitude higher. Measurement tooling hasn't kept up, making it difficult to measure efficiency or ROI.

> A GPU actively serving a loaded LLM is expensive. A GPU sitting idle with a model loaded but no requests arriving is equally expensive, because the model's weights occupy VRAM whether or not inference is happening. For example, a low-traffic model might spend 95% of its time in this "warm but idle" state, burning through your budget while contributing zero productive tokens.

Reviewer: In addition, KV cache hits directly impact the cost of processing input tokens and thus must be measured as well.

The correct comparison is **allocation-based cost vs. external API price**:

```
Self-hosted model at 25% utilization:
  Usage-based cost per million tokens:      $1.00  (compute only — misleading)
  Allocation-based cost per million tokens: $4.00  (real cost — use this)
  External API price per million tokens:    $2.00

Conclusion: The external API is cheaper at the current utilization.
Self-hosting becomes competitive above ~50% utilization.
```

This framing also gives you an optimization target: increasing utilization through smarter routing, model sharing, or traffic consolidation reduces the allocation-based cost per token and can make self-hosting economical.

## What this integration actually measures

The integration uses metrics already present in an llm-d deployment: token throughput from vLLM (`vllm:prompt_tokens_total`, `vllm:generation_tokens_total`), GPU costs from OpenCost's existing allocation engine, and processing-time metrics that support separate cost calculations for input and output tokens.

> The result is a new set of inference cost metrics published to Prometheus and available via OpenCost's REST API and MCP server:

Reviewer: MCP server isn't implemented yet
